=== USABILITY ===

This article was originally published here:

http://amarok.kde.org/blog/archives/1132-Micro-Options,-Many-Options,-No-Options-A-practical-guide-to-help-you-decide..html



Not very long ago, Aaron wrote an article about improving our user experience, stating that
"Micro-Options Suck". Coincidentally, an article appeared on dot.kde.org only a few hours later, stating the
following: "Choice Is Not A Usability Problem".

Ardent readers will notice that there is possibly a contradiction here. In this
article I would like to explain why this is not really a contradiction, but
rather a misunderstanding. To get us started, let's make a jump back in time
(using Flux Capacitor technology):

The year is 2004. It's cold. You are alone. There is a house in the north
(called "KDE"), and a house in the south ("GNOME"). Press "n" or "s".

> n

You have entered the house of KDE. It's a big house, full of obscure items. The
sheer number of items is highly impressive, but you get confused. It is too
much. What is your next step? Press "n" or "s".

> s

You have entered the house of GNOME. This house is neat, clean, but also kind of
empty. There are very few things to play with. You get confused. What is your
next step?

> I give up. User reboots into Windows.


The gist of this little analogy:

KDE was wrong. GNOME was wrong. Also - they both were right!


This is quite obviously another contradiction. Obviously this means that Mark is
not quite right in the head! Well, you're possibly right on both accounts, but
let me explain why it actually makes sense: The truth is somewhere in
between.

KDE has historically been known for being "the nerd's desktop". Basically, we
were so proud of having our own desktop that we quickly determined that giving
everyone as much freedom as possible is ideal. After all, the competition
(Windows) did not offer this. Developer A came along, going "Hey, I have this
fancy idea. It's a bit weird, but let me show you!". Developer B was quick to
reply: "Hell yeah, why not? After all this is our own desktop. We can make all
of our dreams come true. Let's do it!"

GNOME has historically been known for being very sparse with options. They did
this for a good reason: Someone smart realized that KDE was totally going
overboard with options. Too much is too much. Let me show you a classical
example:

http://amarok.kde.org/blog/uploads/crypto_ssl.jpg


Now let me show you an example of the Dolphin settings dialog:

http://amarok.kde.org/blog/uploads/dolphin_settings.png


Dolphin has won 2009's Akademy Award for "Best Application". The above
screenshot demonstrates one of our reasons for choosing it: Peter Penz realized
what generations of GUI developers (both in KDE and GNOME) got wrong: The true
secret to getting your settings right is choosing the essential ones, while
making good choices for defaults that don't need micro-options.

Unfortunately, this is not easy, and it separates the good GUI designer from the
bad one. In fact making these choices is bloody damn hard, I kid you not. It
requires a lot of thought, experience, and taste. But in the end, you, as a
developer, are responsible for making these choices. Creating software is not
about giving the user a LEGO blocks game. If options get too complex, the users
might as well learn programming and do it all by themselves. That's because, if
you think about it, choosing an option is programming: You make the
program use one code path, or a different one. This is essentially the same as
an "if() {}; else() {};" block wrapped in GUI sugar.

To sum it up:

Before adding an option, think hard about it. Could the same be achieved with a
smarter algorithm? Often options are bad excuses for deciding between one bad
implementation and another bad one. Find a good one!

Don't try to solve the problem by removing all options. Some options are very
useful, and they are actually needed. Finding out which of these are needed is
the developer's task. It's a hard task, but it can be done.

Consider asking professionals. We have a KDE Usability team, comprised of real
experts on this topic. Among them is Celeste, a member of the KDE board. She
knows what she's talking about, and she's generally very helpful. Don't be shy,
ask them!
